Preface

This guide was written as a quick reference to getting started
developing on the Liferay Portal platform. It is a guide for those who
want to get their hands dirty using Liferay's framework and APIs to
create fantastic websites.

For a more exhaustive view into Liferay development, we encourage you to
check out the complete, official guide to Liferay development, *Liferay
in Action*, published by Manning Publications. You can find this book
online at [http://manning.com/sezov](http://manning.com/sezov).

The information contained herein has been organized in a format similar
to a reference, so that it will be easier to find specific details
later.

## Conventions

Sections are broken up into multiple levels of headings, and these are
designed to make it easy to find information.

**Tip:** This is a tip. Tips are used to indicate a suggestion or a
piece of information that affects whatever is being talked about in the
surrounding text. They are always accompanied by this gray box and the
icon to the left.

\
\

\
\

Source code and configuration file directives are presented like this.\
\
If source code goes multi-line, the lines will be \\\
separated by a backslash character like this.

*Italics* are used to represent links or buttons to be clicked on in a
user interface and to indicate a label or a name of a Java class.

**Bold** is used to describe field labels and portlets.

Page headers denote the chapters, and footers denote the particular
section within the chapter.

## Publisher Notes

It is our hope that this guide will be valuable to you, and that it will
be an indispensable resource as you begin to develop on the Liferay
platform. If you need any assistance beyond what is covered in this
guide, Liferay, Inc. offers training, consulting, and support services
to fill any need that you might have. Please see
[http://www.](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)[liferay](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)[.com/web/guest/services](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)
for further information about the services we can provide.

As always, we welcome any feedback. If there is any way you think we
could make this guide better, please feel free to mention it on our
forums. You can also use any of the email addresses on our *Contact Us*
page
([http://www.](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)[liferay](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)[.com/web/guest/about\_us/contact\_us](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)).
We are here to serve you, our users and customers, and to help make your
experience using Liferay Portal the best it can be.

## Updates

### November 3rd 2010

Extended existing information about the ext plugin and added information
about alternatives for deployment to production.

### February 27th 2011

-   Overall review of the style by Rich Sezov.

-   Overall review of the guide and rewrite of some sections by Jorge
    Ferrer.

-   Rewrite of the introduction to make it more welcoming to new
    developers.

-   New section: “Understanding the two phases of portlets: action and
    render”

-   Extended information of the chapter about “Ext Plugins” by Tomas
    Polesovsky. New section on JSR-286 security by Tomas Polesovsky.

-   New chapter about the Asset Framework and quick introduction to
    other Liferay frameworks.

-   New chapter about Liferay IDE

-   New chapter for Conclusions with information about how to learn more
    after reading this guide.

-   New chapter with links to reference documentation.

### March 9^th^ 2011

-   Minor improvements and fixes based on the comments by community
    members David H Nebinger and Deb Troxel.

\
\

### April 7^th^ 2011

-   Extracted out Liferay IDE into its own chapter and expand it with
    more information.

-   Update information to Liferay IDE v1.2.2

-   The Service Builder section has been moved within the chapter about
    API's and frameworks and the chapter on tools has been removed.

### April 29^th^ 2011

-   Updated the Checking Permissions section to focus on permission with
    respect to model resources. Provided minor updates to the Security
    and Permissions section overall.

-   Added section Creating Helper Classes for Permission Checking.


