# *Introduction*

Welcome to the Liferay's Developers Guide, the official guide for all
developers that want to develop a portal based on Liferay or that want
to develop an application that anyone can use in their Liferay
installation. This guide will asume that you already know what a portal
is and know how to use Liferay from an end user perspective. If you
don't, it is recommended that you read the [*What is a
Portal?*](http://www.liferay.com/products/what-is-a-portal) Whitepaper
and chapters 1, 5 and 6 of [Liferay's Administration
Guide](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.0/administration).

This first chapter introduces the technologies and tools that you will
be able to use to develop applications and also to extend or customise
the functionalities that Liferay provides out of the box to adapt them
to your needs.

The main mechanism that you as a developer will use to achieve all of
the above in a modular way are Liferay Plugins. Liferay Plugins are
always distributed as Web Archives (.war files), and deployed through
Liferay's deploy mechanisms. There are different types of plugins
depending of its purpose. The following sections describe how to develop
applications for Liferay and how to perform customizations and the types
of plugins that you can use in each case.

## Developing applications for Liferay

According to Wikipedia “A web application is an application that is
accessed over a network such as the Internet or an intranet.”. A portal
application is a web application that can cohexist with many other
applications in a civilized way and also that can reuse many
functionalities provided by the portal platform to reduce the
development time and deliver a more consistent experience to end users.

If you are reading this, you probably want to (or need to) develop an
application that runs on top of Liferay Portal. And you might be looking
for an answer to the question of *what is the best and quickest way to
do it?* Liferay provides two main ways to develop applications, and both
are based on standards:

-   Portlets: portlets are small web applications written in Java that
    follow a certain set of rules to allow cohabitation within the same
    portal or even within the same page. Portlets can be used to build
    applications as complex as you want since the full suite of
    technologies and libraries for the Java platform can be used.

-   OpenSocial Gadgets: gadgets are usually small applications, written
    using browser side technologies such as HTML and Javascript. One
    interesting benefit of gadgets is that they are easy to develop and
    for that reason there are thousands of them in repositories such as
    [iGoogle's
    repository](http://www.google.com/ig/directory?synd=open). When the
    application becomes more complicated you will need a complementary
    backend technology, such as portlets or regular Java web
    applications.

The following sections describe these options with some more detail.

### Portlets

Portlets are small web applications written in Java that run in a
portion of a web page. The heart of any portal implementation is its
portlets, because they contain the actual functionality. The portlet
container is only responsible for aggregating the set of portlets that
are to appear on any particular page.

Portlets are the least invasive form of extension to Liferay, as they
are entirely self contained. Consequentially portlets are also the the
most forward compatible development option. They are hot-deployed as
plugins into a Liferay instance, resulting in zero downtime. A single
plugin can contain multiple portlets, allowing you to split up your
functionality into several smaller pieces that can be arranged
dynamically on a page. Portlets can be written using any of the java web
frameworks that support portlets development, including Liferay's
specific frameworks: MVCPortlet or AlloyPortlet.

### OpenSocial Gadgets

Like portlets, OpenSocial Gadgets are an standard way to develop
applications for a portal environment. From a technology perspective one
key difference is that they don't mandate an specific backend
technology, such as JavaEE, PHP, Ruby, Python, etc. Another difference
is that it has been designed specifically to implement social
applications, while portlets were designed any type of application.
Because of this, OpenSocial Gadgets, not only provide set of
technologies to develop and run applications but also a set of APIs that
allow the application to obtain information from the social environment
such as information about the user profile, his activities or his
friends.

It is possible to deploy OpenSocial Gadgets in Liferay in one of two
ways:

-   Remote Gadget: A remote gadget is one that is executed in a remote
    server but is shown to the user in a given page just as if it was
    another application of the platform. This option is very simple but
    has the drawback that the portal depends on the remote server for
    that gadget to work. This might not even be an option in some
    intranet environments in which there isn't full access to Internet.

-   Local Gadget: consists in deploying the gadget in the Liferay server
    in the similarly as portlets are deployed. Gadgets are defined as an
    XML file so all you need to do is to upload that file to the server.
    Some people like to upload them directly through the file system,
    FTP or similar protocols. In some other cases, just uploading it
    with theDocument Library portlet and copying the URL is enough. Once
    you have the URL you can go to the Control Panel \> OpenSocial,
    click the “New Gadget” button and enter the URL as shown in the
    following screenshot:

![image](../../images/01-introduction_html_m46965e72.png)\
\

After this is done, the gadget will appear as an application that page
administrators can add to their pages.

One additional very interesting feature of the latest versions of
Liferay is that it is possible to expose any application developed as
portlets, as OpenSocial gadgets to the outside world. That is, you can
develop a portlet and then let anyone with access to your portlet to add
it to the pages of other portals or social networks as a remote gadget.

Note that since an OpenSocial gadget is defined in an XML file, there is
no need to create a plugin (that is a .war file) in order to deploy it.
All you need to do is make that XML file accessible within the same or
another server and let Liferay know the URL.

### Reusing existing web applications

Sometimes you don't start from scratch, but there is an existing
application that already exists and which has not been implemented using
Portlets or OpenSocial Gadgets. What can you do in that situation? There
are many options available. Some of the most popular are:

-   Rewrite your application as a portlet

-   Create simple portlets that interact with your application (possibly
    using Web Services) and offer all or part of the functionality to
    end users.

-   Create an OpenSocial gadget as a wrapper for your application. The
    Gadget will use an Iframe to show part of your application in the
    portal page.

-   Create a portlet that integrates the remote application either using
    an iframe or an HTTP proxy (For example using Liferay's WebProxy
    portlet). You will also need to find a way to achieve transfer the
    authentication between the portal and your application.

There are many more options and many reasons why you may want to choose
one or another. Reviewing each of them is out of the scope of this
guide.

If the existing application has been developed as a JavaEE application,
Liferay provides a technology caled Web Application Integrator that
allows prototyping the integration and provides several nice features.

In order to use Web Application Integrator all you need to do is deploy
the WAR file of your web application as you would do with any Liferay
plugin (for example, by using the control panel or by copying it to the
deploy directory). As a result Liferay will automatically create a
portlet that integrates your application using an iframe.

### Supported Technologies

Liferay as a platform strives to provide compatibility with all Java
technologies that a developer may want to use to develop their own
applications. Thanks to the portlet and the JavaEE specifications each
portlet application can use its own set of libraries and technologies
regardless of whether they are what Liferay uses itself or not. This
section refers mainly to portlet plugins, other plugin types are more
restricted. For example the ext plugins can only use libraries that are
compatible with the ones used by the core Liferay code.

Since the choice of available frameworks and technologies is very broad,
the task can be daunting to newcomers. This section attempts to provide
some advice to help developers choose the best tools for their needs.
This advice can be grouped in three:

1.  Use what you know: If you already know a framework, that can be your
    first option (Struts 2, Spring MVC, PHP, Ruby...)

2.  Adapt to your real needs: Component based frameworks (JSF, Vaadin,
    GWT) are specially good for desktop-like applications. MVC
    frameworks on the other hand provide more flexibility.

3.  When in doubt, pick the simpler solution: Portlet applications are
    often much simpler than standalone web applications, so, when in
    doubt use simpler frameworks. (MVC Portlet, Alloy Portlet)

Some of the frameworks mentioned above include their own JavaScript code
to provide a very high degree of interaction. That is the case of GWT,
Vaadin or JSF implementations such as IceFaces or Rich Faces. In other
cases the developers prefer to write their own JavaScript code. In such
cases it's most often recommended to use one of the available JavaScript
libraries. Some of the most common libraries that can be used with
Liferay are jQuery, Dojo, YUI, Sencha (previously known as ExtJs),
Sproutcore, etc. Starting with version 6, Liferay also provides its own
library called AlloyUI which is based on YUI 3 and provides a large set
of components specifically designed for very efficient and interactive
applications that work well in portal environments. Liferay's core
portlets use AlloyUI for all Javascript code. Developers can also use
AlloyUI for their custom portlets or choose any other JavaScript library
as long as they make sure that it will not create conflicts with the
code of other portlets deployed in the same portal.

Besides the frameworks and libraries mentioned in this section, there
are literally thousands more available to Java developers to handle
persistence, caching, connections to remote services, and much more.
Liferay does not impose specific requirements on the use of any of those
frameworks so that portal developers can choose the best tools for their
projects.

## Extending and customizing Liferay

Liferay provides many out of the box features, included a fully featured
content management system, a social collaboration suite and several
productivity tools. For some portals those functionalities might be
exactly what you need, but for some others you might want to extend them
or customize how they work or how they look by default.

Liferay provides several types of plugins that are specialized for an
specific type of customization. It is possible to combine several plugin
types into a single .war file. For example it is a common practice to
combine Themes and Layout Templates. The following sections describe
each type of plugin you may need to use.

### Customizing the look and feel: Themes

Themes allow the look of the Liferay portal to be changed using a
combination of CSS and Velocity templates. In many cases, it is possible
to adapt the default Liferay theme to the desired look using only CSS,
providing the most forward compatibility. If CSS is not sufficient and
more major changes are required, Liferay allows you to include only the
templates you modified in your theme, and it will automatically copy the
rest from the default theme. Like portlets, themes are hot-deployed as
plugins into a Liferay instance.

### Adding new predefined page layouts: Layout Templates

Layouts are similar to themes, except that they change the arrangement
of portlets on a page rather than its look. Layout templates are also
written in Velocity and are hot-deployable.

### Customizing or extending the out of the box functionalities: Hook
plugins

Hook plugins are the recommended method of customizing the the core
functionality of Liferay at many predefined extension points. Hook
plugins can be used to modify portal properties or to perform custom
actions on startup, shutdown, login, logout, session creation and
session destruction. Using service wrappers, it is possible for a hook
plugin to replace any of the core Liferay services with a custom
implementation. Hook plugins can also replace the JSP templates used by
any of the default portlets, allowing you to customize their appearance
as desired. Best of all, hooks are hot-deployable plugins just like
portlets.

### Advanced customization: Ext plugins

Ext plugins provide the largest degree of flexibility in modifying the
Liferay core, and allow replacing essentially any class with custom
implementations. This flexibility comes at a cost however, as it is
highly unlikely that an Ext plugin written for one version of Liferay
will continue to work in the next version without modification. For this
reason, Ext plugins are only recommended for cases where an advanced
customization is really needed and there is no other way to accomplish
the same goal. Also you should make sure that you are familiar with the
Liferay core to make sure the Ext plugin doesn't have a negative effect
on existing funcitonalities.. Even though Ext plugins are deployed as
plugins, the server must be restarted for changes to take effect. For
this reason, Ext plugins should not be combined with other types of
plugins.

\

![image](../../images/01-introduction_html_5c790363.png)**Tip:** If you have
developed for Liferay 5.2 or before, you may be familiar with what was
known as “Extension Environment”. Ext plugins are a new feature in
Liferay 6.0 which replace the extension environment in order to simplify
its development. It is possible to automatically convert any existing
Extension Environment into a plugin. Check the chapter *Migrating old
extension environments* for detailed instructions.

## Choosing the best tool for the job

The Java ecosystem is well know for providing a wide variety of options
for almost any developer work that must be done. This is a great
advantage because you can find the tool that fits best your needs and
the way you work. For that reason once you have found a tool that you
are confortable with and have learned to use it you want to keep using
it.

On the other hand, the wide variety of tools is often intimidating for
newcomers, because they need to choose when they still don't have the
experience to decide which option is better.

In Liferay we have taken a pragmatic approach to make sure Liferay
developers can benefit from the variety of options while still provide a
learning curve that is as soft as possible. To do that we have chosen
two Open Source technologies that you can use if you don't have another
favorites:

-   Apache Ant and the Plugins SDK: Liferay provides a development
    environment called the Plugins SDK that will allow you to develop
    all types of plugins by executing a set of predefined commands (also
    known as targets sin Ant's nomenclature). You can use the Plugins
    SDK directly from the command line, using editors like Emacs, Vi
    EditPlus or even the Notepad. You can also integrate it with your
    favorite IDE, since almost all of them provide support for Apache
    ant. The next chapter describes how to use the Plugins SDK in
    detail.

-   Eclipse and the Liferay IDE: Eclipse is the most popular and well
    known Java IDE and provides a wide variety of features. Liferay IDE
    is a plugin for Eclipse that extend its functionalities to make
    development of all types of Liferay plugins much easier. Liferay IDE
    uses the Plugins SDK underneath, but you don't even need to know
    unless you are trying to perform an advanced operation not directly
    supported by the IDE.

This guide will show how to develop for Liferay using the Plugins SDK.
We have done so to make sure that it was useful for as many developers
as possible even if they don't like IDEs or if they don't use Eclipse.

The guide also has a full chapter on the Liferay IDE. If you are an IDE
person and specially if you are an Eclipse user, you may start by
reading that chapter first and then go back to reading from the second
chapter. It won't be hard to repeat the steps described in the guide
using the Liferay IDE.

**What about if I don't like Apache Ant and I prefer to use Maven?**Many
developers prefer one of the alternatives to Apache Ant. The most
popular of these alternatives is Maven. To support developers that want
to use Maven we have *mavenized* Liferay artifacts so that they can
easily be referred from your pom.xml. We are in the process of writing a
chapter about using Maven for Liferay development and will be added to
this guide in the future. Meanwhile check the following blog entry from
Thiago Moreira for more information:

[http://www.liferay.com/web/thiago.moreira/blog/-/blogs/liferay-s-artifact-are-now-mavenized](http://www.liferay.com/web/thiago.moreira/blog/-/blogs/liferay-s-artifact-are-now-mavenized)

**What if I don't like Eclipse and prefer to use Netbeans, IntelliJ IDEA
or other IDE?** There are many IDEs out there and everyone has its
strong aspects. We decided to build Liferay IDE on top of Eclipse
because it is the most popular Open Source option. But we also want to
make sure developers can use their IDE of choice. In fact quite a few
core developers use Netbeans and Intellij IDEA (who has gracefully
provided an Open Source license to Liferay's core developers). Both of
these IDEs have support for integration with Apache Ant, so you can use
the Plugins SDK with them. Additionally, Sun Microsystems developed an
extension to Netbeans called the *Portal Pack* that is explicitly
designed to develop plugins for Liferay (and their Liferay flavour
called WebSpace). You can find more about the Portal Pack in the
following URL:

[http://netbeans.org/kb/articles/portalpack.html](http://netbeans.org/kb/articles/portalpack.html)

That's it for the introduction. Let's get started with real development
work!
